Response Time versus Utilization in Scheduler Overhead Accounting
------------------------------------------------------------------
Silviu Craciunas, Christoph Kirsch, and Ana Sokolova
------------------------------------------------------------------

Abstract:
------------------------------------------------------------------

We propose two complementary methods to account for scheduler 
overhead in the schedulability analysis of Variable Bandwidth 
Servers (VBS), which control process execution speed by allocating 
variable CPU bandwidth to processes. Scheduler overhead in VBS may 
be accounted for either by decreasing process execution speed to 
maintain CPU utilization (called response accounting), or by 
increasing CPU utilization to maintain process execution speed 
(called utilization accounting). Both methods can be combined by 
handling an arbitrary fraction of the total scheduler overhead with 
one method and the rest with the other. Distinguishing scheduler 
overhead due to releasing and due to suspending processes allows us 
to further improve our analysis by accounting for releasing 
overhead in a separate, virtual VBS process, which increases CPU 
utilization less than through regular utilization accounting. The
remaining overhead may then be accounted for in either more 
increased CPU utilization, or decreased process execution speed. 
Our method can readily be generalized to account for non-constant 
scheduler overhead, motivated by our VBS implementation, which can
be configured to run (with increasing space complexity) in 
quadratic, linear, and constant time (in the number of processes). 
Although our analysis is based on the VBS model, the general idea 
of response and utilization accounting may also be applied to 
other, related scheduling methods.